# Inspecting clang output and the limits of optimisation

Anyone can understand the Collatz conjecture because it's based on a simple game that any child would be able to
understand and even play (although not many children would probably find it an incredibly entertaining game):

> Given a number `n`, divide it by 2 if it's even, or multiply it by 3 and then add 1 if it's odd. Then repeat with the
result.

So, starting from 3, the game would go to 10, 5, 16, 8, and finally in an infinite loop of 4, 2, 1, 4, 2, 1, 4, 2, 1, 
... 

The Collatz conjecture asks if __all__ positive integers will eventually reach this specific infinite loop, or if there
is any exception that maybe falls in a different loop.

A possibly inefficient way to test this conjecture would be to test all numbers one by one. In case you want to do that,
chances are you will pick C++ to tackle this challenge. Of course, if you are dumb enough to attempt this, your function
will probably look something like this:

```
long long unsigned int f(long long unsigned int x) {
  int x_mod_6 = x % 6;
  if ((x_mod_6 == 0) || (x_mod_6 == 2) || (x_mod_6 == 4)) {
    return x / 2;
  } else if ((x_mod_6 == 1) || (x_mod_6 == 3) || (x_mod_6 == 5)) {
    return 3 * x + 1;
  }
  return 3 * x + 1;
}
```
And you will probably place your faith in the infinite wisdom of the compiler to optimise it. So, compile your code with
the `-S` flag and see how much your compiler can really optimise this disaster.

## No optimisation `-O0`


```
% clang++ --std=c++20 -O0 -c collatz.cc -S
```

`-O0` generates instructions that replicate your source file as faithfully as possible:

```
# %bb.0:
	pushq	%rbp
	.cfi_def_cfa_offset 16
	.cfi_offset %rbp, -16
	movq	%rsp, %rbp
	.cfi_def_cfa_register %rbp
	movq	%rdi, -16(%rbp)
	movq	-16(%rbp), %rax
	movl	$6, %ecx
	xorl	%edx, %edx
                                        # kill: def $rdx killed $edx
	divq	%rcx
	movl	%edx, %eax
	movl	%eax, -20(%rbp)
```

Here you get the three comparisons:

```
	cmpl	$0, -20(%rbp)
	je	.LBB0_3
# %bb.1:
	cmpl	$2, -20(%rbp)
	je	.LBB0_3
# %bb.2:
	cmpl	$4, -20(%rbp)
	jne	.LBB0_4
```

Which then continue into `.LBB0_3` (the divide by 2 line):

```
.LBB0_3:
	movq	-16(%rbp), %rax
	shrq	%rax
	movq	%rax, -8(%rbp)
	jmp	.LBB0_10
```

Otherwise you go into `.LBB0_4` with the useless additional checks:

```
.LBB0_4:
	cmpl	$1, -20(%rbp)
	je	.LBB0_7
# %bb.5:
	cmpl	$3, -20(%rbp)
	je	.LBB0_7
# %bb.6:
	cmpl	$5, -20(%rbp)
	jne	.LBB0_8
```

Note the jump to `.LBB0_8` for the else, obviously it can never be taken, but since it's in the source file, it still
gets an instruction in `-O0`.


`.LBB0_7` is the `3*x + 1`:

```
.LBB0_7:
	imulq	$3, -16(%rbp), %rax
	addq	$1, %rax
	movq	%rax, -8(%rbp)
	jmp	.LBB0_10
```

`.LBB0_8` is... I don't even know what it is, to be completely fair, but `.LBB0_9` is the `3*x + 1` in the final else:

```
.LBB0_8:
	jmp	.LBB0_9
.LBB0_9:
	imulq	$3, -16(%rbp), %rax
	addq	$1, %rax
	movq	%rax, -8(%rbp)
```

And finally the return:

```
.LBB0_10:
	movq	-8(%rbp), %rax
	popq	%rbp
	.cfi_def_cfa %rsp, 8
	retq
```


## With optimisation `-O3`

Same source file compiled with `-O3` shows a more reasonable implementation with no jumps and conditional moves instead.
It doesn't look to me like a completely optimised code, but also, I don't understand assembly, so there's that. If that
wasn't enough, using `long long unsigned int` does complicate the instructions a little bit, but of course you had to use
`long long unsigned int` to be able to test all positive integers. Wouldn't want the future of mathematics to be put in
jeopardy because you settled for plain old `int`s.

Classic compiler optimising weird constants into the code:

```
# %bb.0:
	movabsq	$-6148914691236517205, %rcx     # imm = 0xAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAB
	movq	%rdi, %rax
	mulq	%rcx
	shrq	$2, %rdx
	addl	%edx, %edx
```

The `3*x + 1` became this:

```
	leal	(%rdx,%rdx,2), %eax
	movl	%edi, %ecx
	subl	%eax, %ecx
	leaq	(%rdi,%rdi,2), %rax
	incq	%rax
	shrq	%rdi
```

While the even-odd switch was condensed in this conditional move:

```
	testb	$5, %cl
	cmoveq	%rdi, %rax
	cmpl	$4, %ecx
	cmoveq	%rdi, %rax
	retq
```

Getting rid of conditionality is, obviously, impossible for this function. But given that the arithmetical operations
involved are very fast (even the division, it's just by 2), it's easier to compute both values anyway and just return
the correct one.

## Conclusion

Don't bother testing the Collatz conjecture. Personally, I hope there is another loop other than 4,2,1... it would be 
more interesting if there was an infinite loop between numbers of `1e40` orders of magnitude that we just never noticed.
